mica Radhika Khalsa Vaheguru ji ki Fateh
there is a moment on the birthing table
that feels like dying the body in labor
stretches to form an impossible circle
the contractions are less than a minute
apart wave after wave there's barely
time to breathe
the medical term transition because
feels like dying is not scientific and
awesome I checked
during my transition my husband was
pressing down on my sacrum to keep my
body from breaking my father was waiting
behind the hospital curtain more like
hiding but my mother was at my side the
Midwife said she could see the baby's
head but all I could feel was a ring of
fire I turned to my mother and said I
can't but she was already pouring my
grandfather's prayer in my ear thought
the Ivana lucky Bob Rumson ie the hot
winds cannot touch you you are brave she
said you are brave and suddenly I saw my
grandmother standing behind my mother
and her mother behind her and her mother
behind her a long line of women who had
pushed through the fire before me I took
a breath I pushed my son was born as I
held him in my arms shaking and sobbing
from the rush of oxytocin that flooded
my body my mother was already preparing
to feed me nursing her baby as I nursed
mine my mother had never stopped
laboring for me from my birth to my
son's birth she already knew what I was
just beginning to name
that love is more than a rush a feeling
that happens to us if we're lucky love
is sweet labor fierce bloody imperfect
life giving a choice we make over and
over again I am an American civil rights
activist who has labored with
communities of color since September
11th fighting unjust policies by the
state and acts of hate in the streets
and in our most painful moments in the
face of the fires of injustice I have
seen labors of love deliver us my life
on the front lines of fighting hate in
America has been a study in what I have
come to call revolutionary love
revolutionary love is the choice to
enter into labor for others who do not
look like us for our opponents who hurt
us and for ourselves in this era of
enormous rage when the fires are burning
all around us I believe that
revolutionary love is the call of our
times now if you cringe when people say
love is the answer I do too I am a
lawyer so let me show you how I came to
see love as a force for social justice
through three lessons my first encounter
with hate was in the school yard I was a
little girl growing up in California
where my family has lived and farmed for
a century when I was told that I would
go to hell because I was not Christian
called a black dog because I was not
white I ran to my grandfather's arms
Papa Jean dried my tears gave me the
words of Guru Nanak the founder of the
sikh faith
I see no stranger said Nanak I see no
enemy my grandfather taught me that I
could choose to see all the faces I meet
and wonder about them and if I wonder
about them then I will listen to their
stories even when it's hard I will
refuse to hate them even when they hate
me
I will even vow to protect them when
they are in harm's way that's what it
means to be a Sikh s i KH to walk the
path of a warrior saint he told me the
story of the first Sikh woman warrior my
bago the story goes there were 40
soldiers who abandoned their posts
during a great battle against an empire
they returned to a village and this
village woman turned to them and said
you will not abandon the fight you will
return to the fire and I will lead you
she mounted a horse she donned a turban
and with sword in her hand and fire in
her eyes she led them where no one else
would she became the one she was waiting
for don't abandon your posts my dear my
grandfather saw me as a warrior I was a
little girl when two long braids but I
promised fast forward I'm twenty years
old watching the twin towers fall the
horror stuck in my throat and then a
face flashes on the screen a brown man
with a turban and beard and I realized
that our nation's new enemy looks like
my grandfather
and these turbans meant to represent our
commitment to serve cast us as
terrorists and six became targets of
hate alongside our Muslim brothers and
sisters the first person killed in a
hate crime after September 11th was a
sick man standing in front of his gas
station in Arizona
Balbir Singh Sodhi was a family friend I
called uncle murdered by a man who
called himself Patriot he is the first
of many to have been killed but his
story our stories barely made the
evening news I didn't know what to do
but I I had a camera I faced the fire I
went to his widow Jagan their core I
wept with her and I asked her what would
you like to tell the people of America I
was expecting blame but she looked at me
and said tell them thank you three
thousand Americans came to my husband's
memorial they did not know me but they
wept with me tell them thank you
thousands of people showed up because
unlike national news the local media
told Bobby Runkles story stories can
create the wonder that turns strangers
into sisters and brothers this was my
first lesson in revolutionary love that
stories can help us see no stranger and
so my camera became my sword my law
degree became my shield my film partner
became my husband didn't expect Evans we
became part of a generation of advocates
working with communities facing their
own fires
I worked inside of supermax prisons on
the shores of Guantanamo at the sites of
mass shootings when the blood was still
fresh on the ground and every time for
15 years with every film with every
lawsuit with every campaign I thought we
were making the nation safer for the
next generation
and then my son was born
in a time when hate crimes against our
communities are the highest they have
been since 9/11 when right-wing
nationalist movements are on the rise
around the globe and have captured the
presidency of the United States when
white supremacists
march in our streets torches hi hoods
off and I have to reckon with the fact
that my son is growing up in a country
more dangerous for him than the one I
was given and there will be moments when
I cannot protect him when he is seen as
a terrorist just as black people in
America are still seen as criminal brown
people illegal queer and trans people
immoral indigenous people savage women
and girls as property and when they fail
to see our bodies as some mother's child
it becomes easier to ban us detain us
deport us in prison us sacrifice us for
the illusion of security
I wanted to abandon my post but I made a
promise so I returned to the gas station
where Balbir Singh Sodhi was killed 15
years to the day I set down a candle in
the spot where he bled to death
his brother Rana turned to me and said
nothing has changed
and I asked who have we not yet tried to
love we decided to call the murderer in
prison the phone rings my heart is
beating in my ears I hear the voice of
Frank croak a man who once said I'm
going to go out and shoot some tall
heads we should kill their children too
and every emotional impulse in me says I
can't
it becomes an act of will to wonder why
I asked why did you agree to speak with
us Frank says I'm sorry for what
happened but I'm also sorry for all the
people killed on 9/11 he fails to take
responsibility I become angry to protect
Rana
but Rana is still wondering about Frank
listening response Frank this is the
first time I'm hearing you say that you
feel sorry and Frank
frank says yes i am sorry for what I did
to your brother one day when I go to
heaven to be judged by God I will ask to
see your brother and I will hug him and
I will ask him for forgiveness and Rana
says we already forgave you forgiveness
is not forgetting forgiveness is freedom
from hate because when we are free from
hate we see the ones who hurt us not as
monsters but as people who themselves
are wounded who themselves feel
threatened who don't know what else to
do what their insecurities but to hurt
us to pull the trigger or cast the vote
or past the policy aimed at us but if
some of us begin to wonder about them
listen even to their stories we learn
that participation in oppression comes
at a cost it cuts them off from their
own capacity to love this was my second
lesson and revolutionary love we love
our opponents when we tend the wound in
them tending to the wound is not healing
them only they can do that just tending
to it allows us to see our opponents the
terrorists the fanatic the demagogue
they've been radicalized by cultures and
policies that we together can change I
looked back on all of our campaign
and I realized that any time we fought
bad actors we didn't change very much
but when we chose to wield our swords
and shields to battle bad systems that's
when we saw change I have worked on
campaigns that release hundreds of
people out of solitary confinement
reformed a corrupt police department
changed federal hate crimes policy the
choice to love our opponents is moral
and pragmatic and it opens up the
previously unimaginable possibility of
reconciliation but remember it took 15
years to make that phone call I had to
tend to my own rage and grief first
loving our opponents requires us to love
ourselves God the King Mandela
they taught a lot about how to love
others and opponents they didn't talk a
lot about loving ourselves this is a
feminist intervention
because for too long have women and
women of color told been told to
suppress their rage suppress their grief
in the name of love and forgiveness but
when we suppress our rage that's when it
hardens into hate directed outward but
usually directed inward but mothering
has taught me that all of our emotions
are necessary joy is the gift of love
grief is the price of love anger is the
force that protects it this was my third
lesson and revolutionary love we love
ourselves when we breathe through the
fire of pain and refused to let it
harden into hate that's why I believe
that love must be practiced in all three
directions to be revolutionary loving
just ourselves feels good but it's
narcissism loving only our opponents
self-loathing loving only others is
ineffective this is where a lot of our
movements live right now we need to
practice all three forms of love and so
how do we practice it ready number one
in order to love others see no stranger
we can train our eyes to look upon
strangers on the street on the subway on
the screen and say in our minds brother
sister aunt uncle and when we say this
what we are saying is you are a part of
me I do not yet know I choose to wonder
about you I will listen for your stories
and pick up a sword when you are in
harm's way
and so number two in order to love our
opponents tend the wound can you see the
wound and the ones who hurt you can you
wonder even about them and if this
question sends panic through your body
then your most revolutionary act is to
wonder listen and respond to your own
needs number three in order to love
ourselves
breathe and push when we are pushing
into the fires in our bodies or the
fires in the world we need to be
breathing together in order to be
pushing together
how are you breathing each day who are
you breathing with because when
executive orders and news of violence
hits our bodies hard sometimes less than
a minute apart it feels like dying in
those moments my son the places his hand
on my cheek and says dance time mommy
and we dance in the darkness we breathe
and we dance our family becomes a pocket
of revolutionary love our joy is an act
of moral resistance
how are you protecting your joy each day
because in joy we see even darkness with
new eyes and so the mother in me asks
what if this darkness is not the
darkness of the tomb but the darkness of
the womb what if our future is not dead
but still waiting to be born what if
this is our great transition remember
the wisdom of the midwife breathe she
says amen
push because if we don't push we will
die if we don't breathe we will die
Revolutionary love requires us to
breathe and push through the fire with a
warrior's heart and a Saints eyes so
that one day one day you will see my son
as your own and protect him when I am
NOT there you will tend to the wound and
the ones who want to hurt him you will
teach him how to love himself because
you love yourself you will whisper in
his ear as I whisper and yours
you are brave you are brave
Thank You Micah Tajikistan Vicodin Ikki
fussing
[Applause]